We use different kinds of fuel for various purposes at home, in industry and for running automobiles. Can you name a few fuels used in our homes? Name a few fuels used in trade and industry. What fuels are used for running automobiles? Your list will contain fuels like cowdung, wood, coal, charcoal, petrol, diesel, compressed natural gas (CNG), etc. You are familiar with the burning of a candle. What is the difference between the burning of a candle and the burning of a fuel like coal? May be you were able to guess right: candle burns with a flame whereas coal does not. Similarly, you will find many other materials burning without a flame. Let us study the chemical process of burning and the types of flame produced during this process. 
Recall the activity of burning of
magnesium ribbon performed in
Class VII. We learnt that magnesium
burns to form magnesium oxide and
produces heat and light (Fig. 6.1).
We can perform a similar activity with
a piece of charcoal. Hold the piece with
a pair of tongs and bring it near the
flame of a candle or a Bunsen burner.
What do you observe?
We find that charcoal burns in air.
We know that coal, too, burns in air
producing carbon dioxide, heat and
light.
A chemical process in which a
substance reacts with oxygen to give
off heat is called combustion. The
substance that undergoes combustion
is said to be combustible. It is also called
a fuel. The fuel may be solid, liquid or
gas. Sometimes, light is also given off
during combustion, either as a flame or
as a glow.
In the reactions mentioned
above magnesium and charcoal are
combustible substances.
Rightly so. In our body
food is broken down by
reaction with oxygen and
heat is produced. We
learnt that in Class VII.
Can you name some more
substances which are combustible? You
can add those to Table 6.1.
Let us investigate conditions under
which combustion takes place
We find that for combustion, air is
necessary. The candle burns freely in
case (a) when air can enter the
chimney from below. In case (b), when
air does not enter the chimney from
below, the flame flickers and produces
smoke. In case (c), the flame finally
goes off because the air is not
available.
In the sun, heat and light are
produced by nuclear reactions. You
will learn about this process in higher
classes.
The lowest temperature at which a
substance catches fire is called its
ignition temperature.
We find that a combustible substance
cannot catch fire or burn as long as its
temperature is lower than its ignition
temperature. Have you ever seen
cooking oil catching fire when a frying
pan is kept for long on a burning stove?
Kerosene oil and wood do not catch fire
on their own at room temperature. But,
if kerosene oil is heated a little, it will
catch fire. But if wood is heated a little,
it would still not catch fire. Does it mean
that ignition temperature of kerosene oil
is lower than that of wood? Does it mean
that we need to take special care in
storing kerosene oil? The following
activity shows that it is essential for a
substance to reach ignition temperature
to burn.
If we continue heating
the cup, we can even boil
water in the paper cup.
Can you think of an
explanation for this
phenomenon?
The heat supplied to
the paper cup is
transferred to water by
conduction. So, in the
presence of water, the
ignition temperature of
paper is not reached.
Hence, it does not burn.
The substances which
have very low ignition
temperature and can
easily catch fire with
a flame are called
inflammable substances. Examples of
inflammable substances are petrol,
alcohol, Liquified Petroleum Gas (LPG)
etc. Can you list some more inflammable
substances?
It pours water on the fire
(Fig. 6.6). Water cools the combustible
material so that its temperature is
brought below its ignition
temperature. This prevents the fire
from spreading. Water vapours also
surround the combustible material,
helping in cutting off the supply of air.
So, the fire is extinguished.
You have learnt that there are three
essential requirements for producing
fire. Can you list these requirements?
These are: fuel, air (to supply
oxygen) and heat (to raise the
temperature of the fuel beyond the
ignition temperature). Fire can be
controlled by removing one or more of
these requirements. The job of a fire
extinguisher is to cut off the supply of
air, or to bring down the temperature
of the fuel, or both. Notice that the fuel
in most cases cannot be eliminated.
If, for instance, a building catches fire,
the whole building is the fuel.
We find that the gas burns rapidly
and produces heat and light. Such
combustion is known as rapid
combustion.
There are substances like
phosphorus which burn in air at room
temperature.
The type of combustion in which
a material suddenly bursts into
flames, without the application of any
apparent cause is called spontaneous
combustion.
Spontaneous combustion of coal dust
has resulted in many disastrous fires
in coal mines. Spontaneous forest
fires are sometimes due to the heat
of the sun or due to lightning strike.
However, most forest fires are due to
the carelessness of human beings. It
is important to remember that the
campfires must be completely
extinguished before leaving a forest
after a picnic, or a visit.
We generally have fireworks on
festival days. When a cracker is ignited,
a sudden reaction takes place with the
evolution of heat, light and sound. A
large amount of gas formed in the
reaction is liberated. Such a reaction is
called explosion. Explosion can also take
place if pressure is applied on the
cracker.
The substances which vapourise
during burning, give flames. For
example, kerosene oil and molten wax
rise through the wick and are vapourised
during burning and form flames.
Charcoal, on the other hand, does not
vapourise and so does not produce a
flame. In Activity 6.5, could the vapours
of wax coming out of the glass tube be
the cause of the flame produced?
When the candle flame is steady,
introduce a clean glass plate/slide into
the luminous zone of the flame
(Fig. 6.11). Hold it there with a pair of
tongs for about 10 seconds. Then
remove it. What do you observe?
 circular blackish ring is formed on
the glass plate/slide. It indicates the
deposition of unburnt carbon particles
present in the luminous zone of the
flame.
Hold a thin long copper wire just
inside the non-luminous zone of flame
for about 30 seconds (Fig. 6.12).
Notice that the portion of the copper
wire just outside the flame gets red hot.
Does it indicate that the non-luminous
zone of the flame has a high temperature? In fact, this part of the
flame is the hottest part (Fig. 6.13).
